ERIK.TAP: Software for the Acorn Atom

These programs were made on an original Acorn Atom in the early
1980's. They were converted from cassette to Wouter Ras's Atom
Emulator, v. 1.33, in 2000, and this documentation was put together.
Most of the programs are in Swedish, but this documentation provides
translations to let English-speaking people access most of the
programs.

Have fun!

Erik Agrell
Jan. 3, 2001


ASTEROID by EA

Drive your spaceship through an asteroid swarm. Game over after 5
hits. You control the spaceship with SHIFT and REPT. When asked for
the level ("NIVA"), answer with a number, or S for same as before.
  This is a very small game, one of the first I made, on a classical
theme, but it is kind of fun anyway. As an option, you can try to
hit 5 asteroids as fast as possible.
  Try to beat my old records from the original Atom:

   Level  High     Low
     1    9883     12
     2    2812      6
     3    1474      6
     4     829      5
     5     795      5
     6     574      5
     7     565      5
     8     477
    10     643 (really!)
    11     383
    14     283
    18     225
    25     120
    33      61
    50      28


AWARI by Creative Computing, modified by EA.

A game of skill with beans and bins. You control six bins and the
computer controls six. In addition, you have one collector bin each.
When it is your turn, you take all beans from one of your bins and
spread them counterclockwise, one bean per bin. If the last bean
falls into your collector bin, it is your turn again. If the last
bean falls into an empty bin, you gain all beans in the opposite
bin. The game is over when the player to move has no legal moves to
make, because all six bins are empty. The player who has most beans
in the collector bin wins.
  You will be asked for the initial number of beans in each bin.
Then you enter your moves by giving the number (1-6) of a bin on
your side.
  The program is similar to a game on LEENDERT.TAP (2000), but the
computer player seems to be stronger in this version.


DIMP by Acornsoft, modified by EA

This is a Stargate clone, in which you shoot down spaceships with a
sliding cannon. Instructions in English are included. The game was
created by changing just the following 6 bytes of the game Stargate
by Acornsoft (from Games Pack 8):
    ?#2A60 = #8C
    ?#2BEF = #8B
    ?#2DBB = #8B
    ?#2E13 = #AF
    ?#33EE = #42
    ?#343E = #33
The modified game, which my brother for some reason called Dimp, has
twice the distance between the cannon and the stargates.
  Try to beat my old record from original Atom, which is 672. (My
best score in regular Stargate was 562.)


DISASSEMBLER by EA

A nice little disassembler. I used it a lot in the golden Atom age,
about 1983-85, to investigate the Atom ROMs and some commercial
programs.
  The program resides in the higher-mode graphics memory, to let
another program reside in the regular program memory simultaneously.
To run the disassembler, enter ?18=#92 and thereafter RUN. You will
be prompted for the start address and the assembler code is listed.
To quit disassembling a particular segment, type Q to quit, and you
may specify a new start address. Enter S for the same segment as
before.


HEATHROW by unknown, from the journal "Interface", vol. 2, no. 7,
March 1982, pp. 17-18.

A flight simulator. This is a large but boring program of the type
"push a button when the computer tells you to". These are the
original instructions from the journal:

YOU ARE THE CAPTAIN OF A JET
AIRCRAFT LANDING AT HEATHROW
IN THICK FOG YOU DEPEND ENTIRELYON INSTRUMENTS
A COPY OF THE INSTRUCTIONS
WOULD BE USEFUL DURING FLIGHT
PRESS 'SPACE' TO READ EACH FRAME'T' KEEPS YOU ON TRACK
'C' CUTS AIR SPEED (A/S)
'V' INCREASES A/S
'W' CONTACTS TOWER AT 11 OR 12 MFROM TOUCH DOWN (T/D)
'U' LOWERS UNDER-CARRIAGE (U/C)
AFTER'OUTER BEACON'
'H' TRIMS A/C TO HORIZON
AFTER 'INNER BEACON'
'L' TURNS A/C 90 DEG. TO LEFT        for safe landing
VEL <225 & >205
ALT <100
U/C DOWN
NOT > 4YDS. OFF TRACK
ON COURSE 270
A/C TRIMMED TO HORIZON
TOWER CHECKED-RUNWAY CLEAR
          flight plan
TURN LEFT ON TO 000 AT 14 M FROM T/D
CONTACT TOWER AT 11 OR 12 M.
U/C DOWN AFTER 'OUTER BEACON'
TURN LEFT ON TO 270 AT 7 M. FROM T/D
TRIM TO HORIZON AFTER INNER
BEACON
KEEP A/S AT ABOUT 215

thick fog-visibility zero!
ONLY ONE KEY AT A TIME!
CONTROLS RESPOND AFTER 2 SECS.


LABYRINT by EA

Draws a labyrinth and then traces it to the end. The labyrinth is
unforked (not precisely a maze) and follows a historically
interesting pattern, which can be found on ancient sites throughout
Sweden (and perhaps elsewhere). The first question decides the size
(1-12) and the second the tracing mode (M for worm or L for flea).
When the labyrinth is drawn, press RETURN to trace the path.


LIFE by EA

J. H. Conways classical simulation utility Life. It can be regarded
as a generator of beautiful patterns or as a simulation model for
biological life, depending on your interests and mood. A rectangular
grid is inhabited by an arbitrary pattern of cells. If a cell has 2
or 3 neighbors, it will survive to the next generation. If an empty
square has exactly 3 neighbors, a cell is born there. That's all.
The entire future is determined by the initial pattern. Watch and
enjoy.
  The initial pattern can be chosen as (1) last session's initial
pattern, (2) last session's final pattern, (3) random, or (4)
custom. In custom mode, you enter a simple drawing program, in which
the controls are (X) move forward, (SHIFT-X) draw/erase forward, (Z)
left, (C) right, and (RETURN) start. The program prompts for
horizontal and vertical size, where S can be given for same size as
last time. In mode 1 and 2 you will be given the opportunity to edit
the pattern. Answer J for yes or N for no. To abort a running Life
session and return to the main menu, press Q (and hold it down until
the next generation).


LOGIK by EA

My first attempt at artificial intelligence. The program deduces
facts from given plaintext statements. At times it can draw
amazingly smart conclusions. I guess you have to know Swedish to
appreciate this program.
  Examples:

1. Statement: JAG AR HUNGRIG, OCH OM JAG AR HUNGRIG SA ATER JAG PIZZA.
(I am hungry, and if I am hungry, then I eat pizza.) Conclusion: DU AR
HUNGRIG OCH ATER PIZZA. (You are hungry and eat pizza.)

2. Statement: OM DET INTE REGNAR SA GAR JAG UT MED MIN HUND. (If it is
not raining, I will take my dog for a walk.) Conclusion: DET REGNAR
ELLER DU GAR UT MED DIN HUND. (It is raining or you will take your dog
for a walk.)

3. Statement: BOB HAR EN PAPEGOJA. BOB HAR INTE EN PAPEGOJA. (Bob has
got a parrot. Bob has not got a parrot.) Conclusion: contradiction.

4. Statement: OM JAG SPELAR PIANO SA BANKAR GRANNEN I GOLVET. OM
GRANNEN BANKAR I GOLVET SA SPELAR JAG INTE PIANO. (If I play the
piano, the neighbor punches the floor. If the neighbor punches the
floor, I do not play the piano.) The logical conclusion is left as a
problem for the reader. Try to find it before asking the Atom. (No,
the statement is not a contradiction!)

  Do not be alarmed if the program fails to interpret some
statements. After all, no 3 kB program can understand the full
syntax of a natural language.


MORSE by EA

Practise reception of Morse telegraph signals. First you are asked
for the mode. Answer B for receiving four different letters only, A
for all letters, or S for letters and digits. The second question
decides the speed, which can be set from 1 to 255, where 255 is
slowest.


NIM by EA

A classical game with a random number of heaps and a random number
of items in each heap. You take turns with the computer to remove an
arbitrary number of items from *one* of the heaps. The player who
takes the last item wins - or loses, depending on the setup. The
computer is very hard to beat.
  Answer J to the first question to let the last item be the winning
item and N to let it be losing. When it is your turn, enter first
the number of a heap and then the number of items to remove from
that heap.


ORM by EA

Another classical theme. You are a snake. Eat digits while avoiding
the walls and your own tail. Note the design of the cobra head.
  Control the snake with Z, X, /, and [. The score (POANG) and the
current length of the snake (LANGD) are given. Try to beat my old
record from the original Atom, which is 201 POANG.


PIA

This is Pia the Piano, with which you play music on the keyboard.
While most programs of this kind (such as Harpsichord in "Atomic
Theory and Practice") plays a tone with a fixed duration each time a
key is pressed, this program aborts the tone as soon as the key is
released. This feature (which as I recall was somewhat tricky to
implement) gives the instrument a more natural feeling. Only one
tone at a time can however be played.
  To change the setup, press REPT. The options concern (1) the
organization of the keys and (2) the sound source. Valid keyboard
organizations are (A) regular piano, (B) piano with quarter tones,
(C) button accordion, and (D) imaginary string instrument. Setup 2
toggles the sound source between the internal speaker of the Atom
and an external source, which can be connected to the cassette cable
of an original Atom. The latter mode is not applicable to the Atom
Emulator.


PS by unknown, programmed by EA

The digital psychiatrist asks you some questions and presents an
elaborate analysis of your character. The program is in German and
PS stands for Psycho-Spiel. The program is large, over 8 kB, and not
very complex. It consists of a lot of text organized according to a
simple flowchart. The game originates in the journal "Brigitte", no.
11, 1983, p. 142, where it was given as a (noncomputerized) test for
the readers.
  At the time I made this program, I had begun to realize that my
generation would spend an awesome fraction of our lives united with
a keyboard and I had decided to learn typing in a professional
manner. Thus I put a towel on top of the keyboard, put my hands
under the towel, and stubbornly typed the text from an article in a
German journal that happened to be around, without seeing my
fingers. I made a lot of mistakes and my fingers made heavy use of
the delete key, but I persisted and learnt. In retrospect, this was
one of the wisest decisions I have ever made. When all the text was
typed, it was a simple step to implement the flowchart given in the
article and this game was born.


PSYCHO2

This module is automatically loaded by the above game (PS) and
should not be run independently. Since PS is so large, it uses both
the regular program memory and the higher-mode graphics memory. The
two blocks are saved under different names.


SUMS TESTER by unknown

Your task is to solve 10 random arithmetic problems as fast as
possible. The program includes a nice assembler routine for timing
the keyboard input.
  I typed this program off some written source, possibly "The Acorn
Atom Magic Book". I do not remember if I modified it. It is in
English. Try to beat my old record from the original Atom, which is
10 correct answers in 10 seconds.


TRIPPE

An implementation of the children's game of tic-tac-toe. It is
played on a 3x3 grid, where you and the computer have three crosses
and circles, respectively, which you try to maneuvre into a line.
For your first three moves, you will be prompted for the positions
(1-9) of your crosses. For subsequent moves, you enter first the
position of the cross you want to move and then its new position.
  If the program finds several equally good moves, where a slowly
forced victory counts as high as a directly winning move, it chooses
one of the moves at random.
  The game should be a draw at correct play, so in general, the
first player to make a mistake loses. I vaguely recall beating the
program once, but I could never reproduce it.
